chapter9.md, before:

Go Pro
======

There are a lot more things that you can add to your test suite using WebdriverIO. In this chapter we focus more on smaller items that we try out to get to know how it works. Therefor the objective is more to work with WebdriverIO to get to know its full potential.

## Headless Testing

Sauce Labs has a headless offering that allows you to qickly spin up containers to run tests in the earlier dev lifecycle. Try to run a test on Sauce using a headless container:

1. Copy your test from chapter 2
2. Modify it so it runs on our headless cloud

__Tipp:__ It is not difficult at all to run headless using WebdriverIO. Have a look at the [`options`](https://webdriver.io/docs/options.html) WebdriverIO provides 😉.

## Debugging

WebdriverIO has some debugging capabilities that can be really useful in order to debug or author tests. Let's try them out:

1. Run the [`repl`](https://webdriver.io/docs/repl.html) command of `wdio` and play around with the browser in the terminal
2. Add the [`debug`](https://webdriver.io/docs/api/browser/debug.html) command to one of your tests from the previous chapter
3. Debug your test using the DevTools application in Chrome

While you are debugging your test in the terminal, try to open the DevTools application in Chrome and click on the green NodeJS icon at the top left of the window. This should open a new DevTools window that allows you interact with the browser using the Console tab in the DevTools application.

## Custom Sauce Commands

Sauce Labs for all Chrome browser tests on desktop certain [extended debugging](https://saucelabs.com/blog/extended-debugging-with-sauce-labs) capabilities that can become useful for speicifc scenarios. Next to HAR file, console or performance capturing you can use [custom commands](https://webdriver.io/docs/api/saucelabs.html) to e.g. check the network activity of the page.

1. Write a new Sauce Labs test for Chrome that checks if the google analytics call was made on our Vue Todo application
2. Capture the performance metrics of the app with throttled and non throttled network conditions

Commit message:

add chapter 5 on performance testing

chapter9.md, after:

Visual Regression Testing
=========================

We now finished our basic test framework setup and can now look into adding more testing capabilities to it. The advantage of using the WebdriverIO testrunner is that in nicely integrates with cloud services like Sauce Labs or Applitools. In this chapter we now want to focus on building an integration with Applitools so that we can add a visual regression testing component to our tests.

1. Create a free trial account on [applitools.com](https://applitools.com/)
2. Add the [`@wdio/applitools`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@wdio/applitools-service) service to your config that runs tests on Sauce Labs
3. Add your Applitools key to your config
4. Enhance your existing tests so that it takes a screenshot after each test
5. __Bonus:__ Modify the test so that it functionaly still passes but visual not

Depending on the scenario we are usually only interested to run our visual regression tests in CI/CD. It wouldn't make much sense to also include the service into our local config, since our developers or QA engineers might work with the applications while running e2e tests. This could break our baseline.

You can find all information on how to take snapshots within the test in the documentation of the service.

__Tipp:__ You can use the [`execute`](https://webdriver.io/docs/api/browser/execute.html) command in order to inject JavaScript to modify the page visually.
